the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
to view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses visit MIT open
courseware at
ocw.mit.edu so okay so remember last
time
we learned about the cross product of
vectors in
space
so remember the definition of cross
product is in terms of this
determinant I hat J hat K hat and then
the components of a A1 A2 A3 and then
the components of
B and
this is not an actual determinant
because these are not numbers but it's a
symbolic notation to remember what the
actual formula is and the actual formula
is obtained by
expanding the determinant so we have
actually this smaller determinant A2 A3
B2 B3 * I
hat minus determinant of A1 A3 B1 B3 * J
hat
plus determinant of A1 A2 B1 B2 *
Kut and we also saw a more geometric
definition of a cross
product so we've learned
that
the length of a cross product is equal
to the area of the parallelogram
with sides A and
B we've also learned that the
direction of the cross
product is given by taking the direction
that's perpendicular
to A and
B so in
fact if I draw a and b in a
plane they determine a plane together
then the cross product should go in a
Direction that's perpendicular to that
plane now there's two different possible
directions that are perpendicular to a
plane and to decide which one it is we
use the right hand rule
which says if you extend your right hand
in the direction of vector a then curve
your fingers in the direction of B then
your thumb will go in the direction of
the cross
product
okay
so one thing I didn't quite get to say
last time is that there are some funny
manipulation rules um what are we
allowed to do or not do with cross
products so let me tell you right away
the most surprising one maybe if you've
never seen it before it's that A cross B
and B cross a are not the same
thing okay why are they not the same
thing well when way to see it is to
think geometrically sure the
parallelogram still has the same area
and it's still in the same plane so
still perpendicular to the same plane
but what happens is if you try to apply
the right hand rle but exchanging the
roles of A and B then you will either
injure yourself or you will end up
pointing in the opposite direction okay
so in
fact B cross A and A cross B are
opposite of each other and you can check
that in the formula because see for
example the I component is A2 B3 minus
A3 B2 if you swap the roles of A and B
you will also have to change the
signs okay so that's a slightly
surprising think but you'll see one
easily adjust to it it just means resist
the temptation to write you know a
equals ba whenever you do that put a
minus
sign now in
particular well what happens if I do a
cross
a well I will get zero and you know
there's many ways to see that when is to
use the formula uh also you can say just
that you know the parallelogram formed
by a and a is completely flat and it has
area zero so that's the zero
Vector
okay so hopefully you got practice with
cross products and Computing them in
recitation
yesterday uh let me just point out one
important application of cross product
that maybe you haven't seen yet
so let's say that I'm given three points
in space and I want to find the equation
of a plane that contains them so say I
have P1 P2 P3 three points in
space well they determine a plane I mean
at least if they're not aligned and we
would like to find the equation of the
plane that we determine so that means
let's say that we have a point p in
space with coordinates X YZ
well the equation of the
plane let's say the plane containing P1
P2 and
P3 that so that means find a
condition we need to find a condition on
the coordinates
XYZ telling us
whether p is in the plane or
not okay so we have several ways of
doing
that for example one thing we could do
let me just backtrack to determinants
that we saw last time so one way to
think about it is to
consider these vectors P1 P2 P1 P3 and
P1
P okay so the question of whether
they're all in the same plane is the
same as asking ourselves whether the
parallelepiped that they form is
actually completely
flattened right if I try to form a
parallelepiped with these three sides
well if p is not in the plane then it
will have some volume but if p is in the
plane that means that it's actually
completely
squished so one possible answer
one way to think of the equation of a
plane should be that the determinant of
these
vectors should be
zero determinant of P1
P2 P1 P3 and actually let me do it in a
different order it doesn't really matter
but so one possible way to
express the condition that P is in the
plane is to say that the determinant of
these three vectors has to be zero and
if I'm given coordinates for these
points I mean I'm not giving you numbers
but if I gave you numbers then you would
be able to plug these numbers in so you
could compute these two vectors
explicitly you would have numbers here
but here of course this would depend on
X Y and Z so when you compute the
determinant you get a formula that
involves X Y and Z and you will find
that this condition in XYZ that's the
equation of a plane okay so we're going
to see more about that pretty soon now
let me tell you about a slightly faster
way of doing
it actually it's not much faster it's
pretty much the same calculation but
it's maybe more
enlightening oh let me actually show you
the nice color picture that I prepared
for
this okay
so all right so one thing that's on this
picture that I haven't thrown there is
the normal Vector to the plane so why is
that well let's say that we know how to
find a vector that's perpendicular to
our plane then what does it mean for the
point P to be in the plane well it means
that the direction say from P1 to P has
to be perpendicular to this Vector
n okay so here's another solution
so p is in the
plane only when well exactly
when the vector P1 p is perpendicular to
n where n is some
Vector that's perpendicular to the plane
so that's called a normal
Vector not that the other are abnormal
but uh
okay
so how do we rephrase this
condition well we've learned how to
detect whether two vectors are
perpendicular to each other using dot
product okay dot product that's the
first
lecture so these two vectors are
perpendicular exactly when their dot
product is
zero okay and so now concretely well if
we
we have a point P1 given to us and say
we have been able to compute the vector
n then well when we actually compute
what happens here we will have the
coordinates XYZ of a point p and we'll
get some condition on XYZ that will be
the equation of a plane
again now why are these things the
same well before I can tell you that I
should tell you how can we find a normal
Vector but maybe you are already
starting to see what the method should
be because we know how to find vectors
perpendicular to two given
vectors right so we know two vectors in
that plane for example P1 P2 and P1 P3
actually I could have used you know
another permutation of the points but
let's use these so if I want to find a
vector that's perpendicular to both P1
P2 and P1 P3 at the same time all I have
to do is take the cross
product
so how do we
find this Vector that's perpendicular to
the
plane well the answer
is we can just take the cross product P1
P2 cross P1
P3 I should say well you know say that
actually you took the point in a
different order you did P1 P3 cross P1
P2 you would get of course the opposite
Vector but it's fine any plane has
actually infinitely many normal vectors
you can just you know multiply the
normal vector by any constant you will
still get a normal Vector that's
absolutely
fine
so that's going to be one of the main
uses of dot product see when we know two
vectors in a plane it lets us find the
normal Vector to the plane and that is
what we need to find the
equation now why is that the same as the
answer over
there well
the condition that we have is that P1 P
do
n should be zero and we said n is
actually P1
P2 cross P1
P3 so this is what we want to be zero
now if you remember stuff from a long
time ago I mean that was Friday um then
we've introduced this thing and called
it the triple
product okay and what we've seen is that
the triple product is the same thing as
the determinant so in fact these two
ways of thinking one saying that the Box
formed by these three vectors should be
flat and have volume zero and the other
one saying that we can find a normal
vector and then Express the condition
that a vector is in the plane if it's
perpendicular to the normal Vector
they're actually giving us the same
formula in the
end
okay any quick questions before we move
on
yes so these two quantities P1 P do uh
cross product of the determinant of the
three vectors they're always equal to
each other okay they're always the same
and now if the point is not in the plane
then the numerical value will be non
zero if p is in the plane it will be
zero okay let's move on and talk a bit
about matrices
so probably some of you have seen about
matrices a little bit in high school uh
but certainly not all of you and so
anyway let me just introduce you to a
little bit about matrices just enough
for what we'll need later in this class
uh I should say if you want to know
everything about the secret life of
matrices when you should take 1806
someday so okay so what's going to be
our motivation for matrices well in life
a lot of things are related by linear
formulas and even if they are not some
maybe sometimes you can approximate them
by linear formulas
so often we have linear
relations between variables
and for
example well if we if we do a change of
coordinate
systems so for example you know say
that we're in
space well and we have a point so its
coordinates might be let me call them X1
X 2 X3 in my initial coordinate system
but then maybe I need to actually switch
to different coordinates to better solve
my problem because it's more adapted to
other things I will do in my problem and
so I have other coordinate
AES and then in these new
coordinates well it will have actually
different coordinates let me call them
say U1 U2
u3 and then the relation between the old
and the new coordinates is going to be
by linear formulas
I mean especially if I choose the same
origin otherwise there might be constant
terms
which I will not insist
on
so let me just give an
example for example maybe I don't
know let's say for example U1 could be
twice X1 + 3 * X2 Plus 3 *
X3 U2 might be 2 * X1 + 4 * X2 + 5 * X3
u3 might be X1 + X2 + tce X3 do not ask
me where these numbers come from I just
made them up okay that's just an example
of what might
happen um so plug you know put here your
favorite numbers if you
want okay so
now in order to express this kind of
linear relation we can use matrices so a
matrix is just a table with numbers in
it
and so we can reformulate
this in terms of matrix
multiplication or matrix
product okay
so instead of writing this I will write
that The Matrix 2 3 3 2 4
5 1 1
times the vector X1 X2
X3 is equal to U1 U2
u3 okay so hopefully you see that
there's the same information content on
both sides I just need to explain to you
what this
way of multiplying tables of numbers
means well what it means is really that
you know we take exactly these
quantities
but uh let me just say that more
symbolically so maybe this Matrix we
could call a you
know and this we could call X and this
we could call Capital U capital x then
we'll say a * xal U which is is a lot
shorter than that of course I need to
tell you what a x and U are in terms of
their entries for you to get the
formula but it's convenient
notation
so what does it mean to do a matrix
product
so the
entries in
product so you should say so in the
matrix product
are obtained by doing the dot
product so let's say we're doing the
product
ax so we do a DOT product
between the rows dot products between
the rows of
a and The
Columns of
X so
maybe I should say here a is a 3X3
Matrix that just means there's you know
three rows and three columns and X is a
column
Vector which we can think of as a 3X one
Matrix it has three rows and only one
column okay so now what can we do well I
said we're going to do the dot product
between a row of a 2 3 3 and a column of
X X1 X2 X3 well that dot product will be
2 * X1 + 3 * X2 + 3 * X3 it's exactly
what we want to set you want equal to
let's do the second one I take the
second row of a 2 45 and I do the dot
product with X1 X2 X3 I will get 2 * x1+
4 4 * X2 + 5 * X3 okay which is this
thing and same with the third one 1 * X1
+ 1 * X2 + 2 *
X3 okay so that's matrix
multiplication
so again I mean Let Me
Maybe restate that more
generally
so if I want to find the
entries of a product of two matrices A
and B so I'm saying matrices but they
could be of course vectors are now a
special case of matrices just by taking
a matrix of width
one okay
so if I have my Matrix
a and I have my Matrix
B and then I will get the product
AB well let's say for example that a you
know this works in any sizes so let's
say that a is a four sorry a 3x4 matrix
so it has three rows four columns and
here I'm not going to give you the
values because I'm not going to compute
everything it would take you know the
rest of the lecture so and let's say
that b is maybe size 4X two so it has
two columns and four rows and let's say
for example that we have the second
column is 03
02 so a * B I claim will have well the
entries should be the dot products
between these rows and these columns
here we have two columns here we have
three rows so we should get you know
three times two different possibilities
and so the answer will have size 3x
two okay and well we cannot compute most
of them because I didn't give you
numbers but one of them we can compute
we can compute the one that goes here
namely this one in the second column so
I select the second column of B and in
the first row so I take the first row of
a and I find well 1 * 0 0 2 * 3 6 + 0 +
8 should make 14 so this entry here is
14 okay
so in fact let me tell you about another
way to set it up so that you remember
more easily how you know what goes
where so one way that you can set it up
is you can put a
here you can put B up here and then you
will get the answer
here and if you want to find what goes
in a given slot here then you just look
to its left and you look above it and
you do the dot product between these
guys okay so that's I think an easy way
to remember you know first of all it
tells you what the size of the answer
will be the size will be well what fits
nicely in this box should have the same
width as B and the same height as a and
second it tells you which product to
compute for each
position okay so you just look at what's
to the left and what's above the given
position now now there's a catch can we
multiply anything by anything well no
okay I mean I wouldn't ask the question
otherwise but but anyway uh see to be
able to do this dot product we need to
have the same number of entries here and
here otherwise we can't say take this
time that plus this time that and so on
if we run out of space on one of them
before the
other
so the condition and it's kind of
important so let me write it in right
is that the width of
a
must
equal the height of
B okay sorry it's a bit cluttered but
hopefully you can still see what I'm
fighting
so okay okay but now we know how to
multiply
matrices so what does it mean to
multiply matrices I mean of
course we've seen uh you know on this
example that we can use the Matrix to
tell us how to transform from X's to
use and that's an example of
multiplication but now let's say that we
have two matrices like that telling us
how to transform from something to
something else what does it mean to
multiply
them
so I
claim is that so I claim that the
product AB
represents doing first the
transformation B
then trans formation
a so that's a slightly counterintuitive
thing because we're used to writing
things from left to right uh
unfortunately with matrices the way
they're done you multipy I mean you
multiply things from right to left if
you think about it you know when you
write say you have two functions f and g
you write F of G of X it really means
you apply first G then F so it works the
same way as that
okay so why why is this well if I write
AB * X where X is some Vector that I
want to transform it's the same as a *
BX okay so this property is called
associativity and it's a good property
of well behaved products uh not of cross
product by the way but so matrix product
is
associative that means we can actually
think of a product ax and multiply them
in whichever order we want we can start
with BX or we can start with
a so
now BX means we apply the transformation
B to X and then multiplying by a means
we apply the transformation
a so we first apply B then we apply a
that's the same as applying AB all at
once
Okay so
another note of warning is that ab and
ba are not the same thing at all well I
mean you probably see that already from
this interpretation it's not the same
thing to you know convert oranges to
bananas then to carrots or vice versa
um uh on the other
hand well I mean actually even worse
this thing might not can be well defined
because you know if the
height of sorry the width of a equals
the height of B we can do this product
but we we don't necessarily I mean it's
not clear that the width of B will equal
the height of of a which is what we
would need for that
one okay so you know the size condition
to be able to do the product might not
make sense actually maybe one of them
doesn't even make sense even if they
both make sense they're usually complet
different
things okay the next thing I need to
tell you is something called the
identity
Matrix well the identity Matrix is the
Matrix that does nothing okay so what
does it mean to do nothing I don't mean
the Matrix Zero The Matrix zero would
take X and would always give you back
zero that's not very interesting
transformation um what I mean is the guy
that takes X and gives you X again so it
satisfies in know property I so it's
called I and it has a property that IX
equals X for all X so it's the
transformation from something to itself
it's the obvious transformation called
the identity
transformation so how do we write that
as a
matrix well so actually there's an
identity for each size you know because
of course depending on whether X has two
entries or 10 entries uh The Matrix I
needs to have a different
size
so for example the identity Matrix of
3x3 has entries one one one on the
diagonal and Zer everywhere
else okay let's check if we multiply
this with a vector well okay maybe I
should do that on a separate board
but so start thinking about it what
happens when I multiply this with a
vector X
okay so let's say I
multiply The
Matrix
I with a vector X1 X2
X3 well what will be the first
entry it will be the dot product between
1 0 0 and X1 X2 X3 if you want this
Vector is I hat okay so if you do the
dot product with IH hat you will get the
X component you will get the first
component that will be X1 1 * X1 + 0 0
similarly here if I do the dot product I
get 0 + X2 + z i get x2 and here I get
X3 okay it
works same thing if I put here a matrix
I will get back the same
Matrix now of
course okay so in
general the identity Matrix in size n
byn
so it's an N byn thing with ones on the
diagonal and Zer everywhere
else okay you just put one at every
diagonal position and zero elsewhere and
then you can see if you multiply that by
a vector you will get the same Vector
back
okay oh
okay uh let me give you another example
of a
matrix let's say that in the
plane we look at the transformation that
does
Rotation by
90 uh let's
say counterclockwise
so I claim that this is given by The
Matrix 0 1 - 1 0 so let's try to see why
that is the
case well if I do R * I hat so if I
apply that to the first vector
IH hat so that means
okay IH hat will be one
Z this product well here you will get
zero and then you will get
one you get J
hat okay so this thing
sends IH hat to
jut what about Jad
well you
get1 and then you get zero so that's
minus I so J is sent towards here and in
general if you apply it to a vector with
coordinates XY with components XY then
you will get back uh minus YX which is
the formula we've seen for rotating a
vector by 90
so it seems to do what we
want uh by the way I should point out so
the columns in this Matrix represent
what happens to each basis Vector to the
vectors I and J see what I mean this guy
here is exactly what we get when we
multiply R by I and when when we
multiply R by J we get this guy
here so what's interesting about this
Matrix well we can do computations with
matrices in ways that are easier than
writing coordinate change formulas for
example if you compute R squ so if you
multiply r with
itself well I let you do it as an
exercise but you will find that you get
minus1 - 1 0 0 so that's minus the
identity
Matrix why is that well if I rotate
something by 90 and then I rotate by
90 again then I will rotate by 180
that means I will actually just go to
the opposite Point around the origin so
I will take X Y to - xus
y
okay and if I applied r four * R to 4
would be identity
okay um questions yes came for matx
is r
or Ah that's a very good question so how
did I come up with this R well secretly
I worked pretty hard to find what are
the entries that would tell me how to
rotate something by 90 degrees
counterclockwise so remember I mean I
should have said um what we saw I think
last time or the first lecture is that
to rotate a vector by
90 we should change XY
to minus
YX okay and so now I'm trying to express
the this transformation as a matrix and
if you work out you know how these guys
so maybe you want to call these guys u
and v and if you write U equals 0x - 1 y
0x - 1 Y and then V = 1x + 0 y 1 x + 0 y
okay so that's how I would find it uh
here actually I just gave it to you you
know ready made so you didn't really see
how I how I found
it uh you will see more about rotations
on the problem on the problem set
there's so you're going to see more
about these things
okay uh so next I need to tell you how
to invert matrices so what's the point
of matrices it's that it gives us a nice
way to think about these changes of
variables and in particular if we know
how to express u in terms of X maybe
we'd like to know how to express X in
terms of U well we can do that because
we've learned how to solve linear
systems like this okay so in principle
we could start working substituting and
so on to find formulas for the X1 X2 X3
as functions of U1 U2
u3 and the relation will be again a
linear relation it will again be given
by a matrix well what's that matrix it's
the inverse transformation so it's the
inverse of the Matrix
a so we're going to learn how to find
the inverse of a matrix directly
okay so the
inverse of a by definition it's a
matrix M with a
property that
If I multiply a by m then I get identity
and If I multiply M by a I also get
identity the two properties are
equivalent um so that means you know if
I apply first the transformation a then
the transformation M I actually I undo
the transformation a and vice versa
these two Transformations are the
opposite of each other well I should say
the inverse of each
other okay so
for this to make sense we
need a must be a square
Matrix okay so it must have size n by n
can be any size but it must be the same
number of rows as
columns and um it's a general fact that
I mean you will see more in detail in
linear
algebra if you take
it um so let's just admit that
so so the Matrix M we will denote by a
inverse like this
okay and then what is it good for well
for example the
solution to a linear
system so what's a linear system in our
new language it's a matrix times some
unknown Vector x equals some known
Vector B
well how do we solve
that we
just compute x equals a inverse B why
does that
work how do I get from here to here and
let's be
careful
oh okay well I'm going to reuse this
Matrix but I'm going to erase it
nonetheless I'll just rewrite it
minute
so I'm saying if ax equals
B then
let's multiply both sides by a inverse a
inverse * a x is a inverse B and then
well a inverse * a is identity so I get
x equal a inverse B that's how I solved
my system of
equations so if you have a calculator
that can invert matrices then you can
solve linear systems very
quickly now we should still learn how to
compute these things yes
how do I know that a inverse will be on
the left of B and not after it well it's
exactly in this derivation so if you're
ever not sure then just reproduce this
calculation see I mean to get from here
to here what I did is I multiplied
things on the left by a inverse and then
this guys simplify if I had put a
inverse on the right I would have a x a
inverse which might not make sense and
even if it makes sense it doesn't
simplify so I me the basic rle is you
know you have to multiply by inverse on
the left so that it cancels with this a
that's on the
left that's correct so and you know in
our usual way of dealing with matrices
where the vectors are column vectors I
mean it's just something to remember
that if you have a square Matrix a
column Vector I mean the product that
makes sense is with the Matrix on the
left the vect on the right the other one
just doesn't work it's not sized you
cannot take x * a if a and
X you know if a is a square Matrix and X
is a column Vector this product makes
sense the other one doesn't make sense
it's not the right
size
okay so what we need to do is to learn
how to invert a matrix and it's useful
to know first for your general knowledge
and second because uh actually
it's uh it's actually useful later for
things we'll see in this class so in
particular on the exam you will need to
know how to invert a matrix by
hand so I should say this formula is
actually good for small matrices you
know 3x3
4x4 it's not good at all if you have a
matrix of size a thousand by a thousand
so in computer software actually for
small matrices they do this for larger
matrices they use other
algorithms but let's just see how we do
it so I'm going to do it okay so first
of all I will give you the final
answer and of course for that I will
need to explain what the answer
means so we'll have to compute something
called The adjoint Matrix and I will
tell you how to do that and then we'll
divide by the determinant of a
so how do we get to the adjoint Matrix
so let's go through the
steps on a 3X3
example the steps are the same no matter
what the size is but let's do 3 by
three so let's say that I'm giving you
the Matrix a well let's say it's the
same as earlier the one I erased so that
was the one relating
our x's and our
use so the first thing I want to
do is find What's called the
minors so what's a
minor well it's a slightly smaller
determinant we've already seen them
without calling them that way
so for example so the Matrix of miners
will have again the same size okay let's
say we want this entry then we just
delete this row and this column sorry
this row and this column and we're left
with a 2X two determinant okay so here
we'll put the determinant 4 51 2 which
is 4 * 2 8 - 5
3 let's do the next one so for this
entry I delete this row and this column
I'm left with 2 5 1 2 determinant will
be 2 * 2 - 5
is1
then minus two then I get to the second
row so I get to this entry well to find
the minor here I will delete this row
and this column and I'm left with 3 3 1
2 3 * 2us 3 is
3 and let me just cheat and give you the
others I mean I think I've shown you
that I can do them
okay
so okay so let's just explain the last
one again the last one this two um so to
find the minor here I delete this column
and this row and I take this determinant
2 * 4 minus 2 *
3 okay so it's the same kind of
manipulation that we've seen when we've
taken determinants and cross
products okay step
two we go to another Matrix that's
called co-actors so the co-actors are
pretty much the same thing as the minus
except the signs are slightly
different okay so what we do is we flip
signs according to a
checkerboard diagram
so you start with a plus in the upper
left corner and you alternate pluses and
minuses Okay so
the rule is if there's a plus somewhere
then there's a minus next to it and
below
it and then below a minus or to the
right of a minus there's a plus okay so
that's what it looks in size
3x3 um so what do I mean by that so I
don't mean you know make this positive
make this negative and so on that's not
what I mean what I mean is if there's a
plus that means leave it alone okay we
don't do anything to it if there's a
minus that means we flip the
sign okay so here we get well three
then 1 minus
2 minus 3 1 +
1be I'll put pluses just to emphasize 3
- 4 and
two okay let's St is pretty easy I mean
the only hard step in terms of
calculations is this one because you
have to compute all of these 2x two
determinants by the way I mean this
minus sign here see it's actually very
related to the way in which when we do a
cross product we have a minus sign for
the second
entry okay we
are almost done third step is to
transpose
so what does it mean to transpose it
means you read the rows of your Matrix
and you write that as columns or vice
versa okay so let me just say we
switch rows and
columns so what do we get well let's
just read it horizontally and write it
vertically we read 3 1 - 2 3 1 - 2 then
we read - 3 1 1
- 3 1 1 then 3 - 4 2 3 - 4
2 okay that's pretty
easy and we're almost done the last step
so what we get here is this is the
adjoint
Matrix so the fourth and last step is to
divide by the determinant of a
okay so here we have to compute the
determinant 2 3 three so we should say
determinant of a okay not the
determinant of this
guy
so 2 3 3 2 4 5 112 well I let you check
my computation I found that it's equal
to
three okay so the final answer is that a
inverse is 1/3 of The Matrix we got
there 3 - 3 3 1 1 - 4 - 2 1
two okay and now so that tells us
remember a told us how to find the use
in terms of the X's this one tells us
now how to find the x's in terms of the
use if you multiply U1 U2 u3 by this you
get back X1 X2
X3 it also tells you how to solve the
linear system a * xal
something okay that's the end for today